---
hero: ../../img/2021/01/screw-wheel.jpg
---

IKEA office chair: lock wheels on an uneven floor
=================================================
January 23, 2021

I love my apartment. But there's one thing with it. It's not level.
Like, not at all.

That never really bothered me. Until the day I buy an office chair. You
know, the kind with wheels.

And guess what happens when you put something with wheels on an uneven
surface? It rolls around. And the last thing I want when I'm sitting on
my office chair, or when I'm not sitting on it for what it's worth, is
it rolling around without my permission.

Put it on a carpet
------------------

The first thing I did was to put it on a carpet, and that straight up
solved the issue. That's great, but the carpet comes with a bunch of
other inconvenience (like extra hassle when moving furniture around,
need to clean it, having area limits, and so on) so I ditched that at
some point and looked for another solution.

Manual brakes
-------------

If you have the kind of wheels with brakes, just lock the brakes and
you're good, but if you have this kind of wheel you would probably not
be reading this.

You can get replacement wheels with brakes, but I have an IKEA chair
that have a special kind of nonstandard socket for the wheels so I
didn't find any in Canada that had a reasonable price and shipping date.

Elastics (don't do that)
------------------------

One thing I tried was tying a whole bunch of elastics inside the wheels.
And that did work. For 5 minutes. After that the elastics started to
catch in the mechanism and broke one after the other and I ended up with
a mess of bits of elastic all over the floor.

Automatic brakes
----------------

But it turns out that I have an IKEA chair, the kind that have automatic
brakes when you're not sitting on it. So the chair is not moving when I
don't use it, but as soon as I sit on it, it starts rolling around and I
have to keep my feet on the floor and keep my abs and legs tight to
prevent it from moving. Good workout, but I don't want to deal with that
all day.

I really wanted to find a way to keep those brakes on all the time. It's
just the perfect amount of braking, like you can still roll it around if
you push it, but it's not gonna move by itself even on the slanted
floor.

The way the mechanism works is that there's a spring in the inner
mechanism that pushes the wheel up so it rubs against a brake surface
when you're not sitting on it, but your weight when you sit down pushes
it down so that it's not touching the brake anymore and can roll freely.

What I wanted is for the wheel to say in the place where it's on the
brake even when I'm sitting on it.

Obviously the mechanism is built in a way where you can't disassemble
anything without breaking it, so I was left with a limited number of
solutions.

Screw it
--------

What I ended up doing is take a bunch of screws, and screw them down
the brake mechanism to lock it in place.

<figure class="center">
  <img alt="Screw in chair wheels" src="../../img/2021/01/screw-wheel.jpg">
</figure>

And that worked! It's been a couple of months and the chair is still
locked in brake mode where it doesn't move around by itself.
