YouTube comment notification but no comment on video
====================================================
January 23, 2021

Since about a year that I'm actively posting videos on YouTube, I'm
regularly getting new comments.

I've been having an issue that whole time where sometimes I get a
notification for a comment (via email and in the notification bell on
YouTube as well) but the comment is nowhere to be seen on the video.

I've actually seen 3 different outcomes for this issue.

Top comments
------------

The first one was that the comment wasn't displaying when in "top
comments" display mode under the video, for some reason.

But when switching to "newest first", it would actually come up and I
was able to reply to it!

<figure class="center">
  <img alt="Newest first" src="../../img/2021/01/newest-first.png">
</figure>

Held for review & likely spam
-----------------------------

The second possibility was that the comment ended up in the "held for
review" or "likely spam" tabs that you can find on the comments section
on YouTube Studio.

Going there you can approve the comment and then reply to it, and it
will appear under your video.

<figure class="center">
  <img alt="Held for review" src="../../img/2021/01/held-for-review.png">
</figure>

By the way the "likely spam" tab is gone for me, but I remember seeing
there in the past and people online still mention it, so it might work
for you.

Just gone
---------

The third option though was that the comments were just completely gone,
nowhere to be seen. Changing to "newest first" didn't help, and they
were not in "held for review" or "likely spam" either.

Maybe the user deleted their comment, but at least one of them was from
a close friend and I could ask him directly if he removed his comment,
and he surely did not.

This have been happening regularly all year and it's so frustrating
because it happens on nice, positive and constructive comments that I
really wanted to answer, and none of those were against the YouTube
rules and none of them seemed like a comment the user would go back to a
couple days later to delete.

It happened one more time this week and I decided to try to find a
solution again.

I found that [support center thread](https://support.google.com/youtube/thread/5258442) where *a lot* of other users have the exact same issue.

Sadly this only showed me that I wasn't alone with that problem but
there was no working solution there.

Except one of the last comments that was mentioning the YouTube Studio
*app*, and that's when I considered the fact I was only going on YouTube
Studio via my desktop browser, but I've never tried the *mobile app*.

Use the mobile app!
-------------------

I went and downloaded the YouTube Studio mobile app, and went to the
comments section, in the "held for review" part, and here they were! The
comments that I couldn't find earlier were there, and I could actually
approve them, and then reply to them.

Sadly this only keeps the comments from the last 60 days so the ones
from earlier last year that I knew disappeared are gone forever, but at
least I now have a solution for the future times this happens!
