# Starting to brew beer: things I wish I knew
June 8, 2019

Last year, I started to [brew beer](https://photography.codejam.info/2018/2018-11-26-brewing.html)
as a hobby with a friend. After [a couple of batches](https://github.com/valeriangalliat/sans-pression),
here's a small article to share some learnings from that experience so far.

## Start with a 1 gallon kit

This might be the only thing we got straight right. If you never brewed
beer before, start with a 1 gallon kit (e.g. [a kit like this](https://www.beergrains.com/1-Gallon-Starter-Kit/)),
don't directly get into a bigger setup.

The reason for this is that it lets you experiment with brewing at a
very limited cost. If you decide you don't enjoy brewing that much, at
least you didn't invest hundreds of dollars into your equipment.

If you do want to keep on with brewing, you'll quickly notice that 1
gallon is not that much beer and will want to scale to 6 gallons
batches, possibly fermenting multiple of them at the same time.

However, the 1 gallon kit is never lost. It will always be handy to make
experimental batches, when you want to try different things and be more
creative without taking too much risk (as if it ends up to be
undrinkable, you didn't waste a lot), and when you're satisfied with
your experimental recipes, you can easily increase the quantities to
make bigger batches of them.

## Get an auto-siphon

Maybe we just suck at using a regular siphon, but when trying to rack
the beer with it, it took many attempts to get the stream running, and
we ended up having to suck on the end of the tube to start the siphon,
and it would sometimes randomly stop and we'd have to reactivate it in
the same way, resulting in repeated mouth contact with the siphoning
tube (even after "sanitizing" your mouth with vodka as I sometimes see
advised online, I still would rather avoid this) and accidental spitting
into the beer as well. It still turned out good, but might as well not
do this kind of things.

To avoid this, just directly get an auto-siphon. It's trivial to use,
and you can effortlessly start the stream or give it a little boost if
it was to slow down.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640263.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640263.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Get a wort chiller

When you start doing more than 1 gallon (e.g. 6 gallons) batches, get a
wort chiller. It's somewhat pricey (count between $80 and $100 Canadian
for a 6 gallons one, regardless if you if you make it yourself or get a
premade one), but the time and energy it saves you is so worth it even
since the first time you use it.

Without a wort chiller, you can try to put the mash tun in the bath tub
with cold water (that's even if you have a bath tub), continuously
throwing ice in the water to cool it down, but even then it can take
many hours to get the temperature down to a point where it won't kill
the yeast, while the wort chiller will get the job done in 10 minutes
without you having to do anything other than opening the tap of cold
water.

So do yourself a favor and get a wort chiller.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640253.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640253.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

You might need an extra adapter to plug it onto your sink as they
usually come with a piece that fits garden hose size.

Here, we have a 1/2" (sink) to 3/4" (garden hose) adapter.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640255.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640255.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Set up a blow-off instead of an airlock

While airlocks are nice, it turned out for me that a blow-off is pretty
much as easy to set up and prevents potential mess.

For example, you might make the mistake of over filling your carboy,
thus not letting enough head space for the fermentation, and this will
quickly clog the airlock. Or maybe with the kind of beer you're doing
you're having a very active fermentation and the same results happen.

To avoid this potential issues, just go for a blow-off and stop
worrying. It's easy, instead of putting the airlock in, just put a
plastic tube in, and put the other end into a jar that contains some
sanitized water (e.g. OxySan). As your beer is fermenting, you'll see
bubbles in the jar the same way you would see them in the airlock, but
if for some reason it overflows, it's just gonna end up in the jar and
won't block anything.

When the fermentation is done being active, feel free to switch it for
an airlock, but at that point might as well just leave the blow-off
unless you really need that jar or tube.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640264.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640264.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Consider getting a carboy opener

This little tool that costs like 2 bucks might save you some time and
energy. Get it just in case while you're at the brewing equipment store.

It can happen after sitting for many weeks or even months that the
carboy lid gets pretty tight and hard to remove by hand, especially
if you used a nylon bag to dry hop or infuse extra ingredients.

A carboy lid opener will then be really useful for you to easily open
your carboy when you need, instead of struggling with your fingers for
a while to get it open.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640257.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640257.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640259.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640259.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Get a grain filter basket or bag

If you're gonna use the same mash tun to make your mash and to boil it,
you're gonna have to get rid of the grains and clean it up before
boiling.

Regardless if you're using a regular strainer or a bazooka filter,
you'll end up with a lot of grains in your mash tun which will take some
time to remove while your mash is just sitting there.

Instead, you can get a grain filter basket, or a grain filter bag (much
less expensive) to put in the mash tun, so that when you're done with
the grains, you can just remove the filter basket or bag, and the tun is
instantly ready to use.

Then, as the boil is going, you can take the time to clean up the grain
filter in parallel instead of it delaying the start of your boil.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640248.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640248.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640251.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640251.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Optional: use swing top bottles

Swing top bottles are cool. Easy to open and close, no need for caps and
capper, plus they make a very nice *pop* when you open them. Guaranteed
effect in parties.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2600461.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2600461.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Drink your homebrew while brewing

Unelss it's your very first batch, brewing time is the best time to
enjoy one of your previous homebrews!

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2580621.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2580621.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2580635.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2580635.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>

## Mandatory: honor the hot scotchie tradition

When draining the mash, sweep a little jar down the spigot to get some
of that tasty warm malt juice. Pour a drop of your favorite single malt
scotch in it and enjoy one of the greatest beverages in the world.

I tried a couple different scotch from my collection for this and my
favorite so far was hands down the Aberlour 10. It spices up the mash
while keeping it smooth and without being overwhelming. While otherwise
I'm a huge fan of Laphroaig, Lagavulin or Caol Ila, those didn't really
cut it for the hot scotchie as their strong character would just stand
out and didn't pair well with the sweeter taste of hot mash.

<figure class="center">
  <a href="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/P2640272.html">
    <img src="https://photography.codejam.info/photos/hd/P2640272.jpg">
  </a>
</figure>
